---
layout: page
title: The Black Death Digital Archive
---
The enormous body of evidence to reconstruct the pandemic has so far not been systematically compiled. This is the first scholarly initiative that aims to assemble all extant evidence (published and unpublished) on the pandemic and serve as a gateway for future research. This project collects different types of data—both documentary (archival, narrative) and material (bio-archeological, palaeogenomic) evidence—and assesses the evidence with the expertise of scholars working on different aspects of plague. As an open-access site, the BDDA portal will serve scholars, educators, students, and the wider public.

Over the past ten years, the BDDA project participants have pioneered new approaches to the history of plague during the Second Plague Pandemic, the 500-year period in which new strains of plague spread throughout most of the Old World. This “new paradigm” in plague studies has readily adopted the evolutionary perspective on the history of Yersinia pestis as a pathogenic organism as put forward by biologists working from both phylogenetic (evolutionary) and palaeogenetic (aDNA retrieval) perspectives. Now, instead of “plague” functioning as a generic term for any kind of epidemic disease, or even a sustained catastrophe of some sort (e.g., the ten Biblical “Plagues of Egypt”), plague—the disease caused by the bacterium Y. pestis— has become a biologically verifiable entity in human history. Plague can now be tracked with precision through space and time, thus creating a narrative of the pathogen’s effects on societies as distinct as Bronze Age Eurasia, the late medieval Mongol Empire, early modern East Africa and India, and the modern American West.
 
However, the history of the micro-organism only tells one part of the history of plague as a disease. The rest of the story must be told by putting the biology into dialogue with what we can learn from documentary and archaeological sources about the actual causes of epidemic and pandemic events, and the effects of such phenomena on human populations. Over the last decade, our team members (individually or collaboratively) have spearheaded this new approach to plague history in their scholarship. BDDA is a natural outgrowth of our joint efforts to make this new paradigm accessible to a larger community.
